.TH NSMAINT 8 local
.DA 09 June 1989
.SH NSMAINT
nsmaint \- allow non\-root users to maintain the name server and data base
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nsmaint
[
.B -d
]
sync|kill|start|stop|dump|clean|START|...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Nsmaint
is a setuid program intended to allow non\-root users the ability
to stop and start the
.IR named (8)
name server daemon and to edit files in its database.  The program
assumes that all name server data base files are stored in a directory
tree rooted in a single directory (conventionally
.IR /etc/nsdata )
and that users who are name server maintainers will be members of a
group named
.IR nsmaint .
.PP
The program is invoked with a single keyword, which indicates the
operation to be performed, as an argument.  The following keywords
are understood.
.PP
.B sync
.PP
Causes the running daemon to reread its data base (by sending a
SIGHUP to the daemon).  This is useful for
making the name server aware of changes which have been made to its
data base files.
.PP
.B stop
.PP
Causes the running daemon to terminate by sending a SIGTERM signal to it.
.PP
.B kill
.PP
Currently a synonym for the
.I stop
keyword.
.PP
.B start
.PP
Causes a new instance of the daemon to be started.  This is equivalent
to running the named program from a root account except that
.I nsmaint
will first try to determine if a named is running already and, if so,
will politely decline to start a second copy.
.PP
.B START
.PP
Like
.IR start ,
except that the check for an already running daemon is not performed.  The
check for an existing daemon can occasionally be mistaken.
.I START
is available to force the issue.
.PP
.B dump
.PP
Sends a SIGINT signal to the running daemon, which should provoke it into
dumping its internal database into a disk file (conventionally
.IR /usr/tmp/named_dump.db ).
.PP
.B clean
.PP
Does a recursive cleanup of file ownerships and permissions in the
name server data base directory (conventionally
.IR /etc/nsdata ).
The ownership of all directories and singly linked regular files are
changed to user
.I root
and group 
.IR nsmaint ,
with permissions being set to 664 for regular files and 775 for
directories (in effect, all files are made group writable).
.I Nsmaint
will quietly decline to change the ownership or permissions of files
and directories with the sticky bit set.  It will also noisily decline to
change regular files with more than one link and any files which are
neither directories nor regular files, including symbolic links.  Attempts
to make
.I nsmaint
do something which it considers a possible attempt to breach security are
reported via
.IR syslog (3)
at high priority.  Note that while the root of the database tree (i.e.
.IR /etc/nsdata )
may be a symbolic link, links of any kind are disallowed below this point.
.PP
.B debuginc
.PP
Causes the debug level of the running daemon to be incremented, by sending
it a SIGUSR1 signal.
.PP
.B debugoff
.PP
Causes debugging to be turned off in the running daemon, by sending it a
SIGUSR2 signal.
.SH FILES
.nf
.ta \w'/usr/tmp/named_dump.db   'u
/etc/named	name server daemon executable
/etc/named.pid	the process id of the running daemon
/etc/nsdata	root of the database tree
.fi
.SH "SEE ALSO"
named(8)
.SH BUGS
.I Nsmaint
is a setuid program of considerable power.  It is better if members of
the nsmaint group are at least somewhat trusted users.
